Morni Hills- A Perfect Travel Guide


Introduction


Are you having a rough week with your work and just wish to drop everything and head for the hills? Stop fretting and pack some warm clothes and a Ruskin Bond book to be at one with the charm of Morni Hills! Located far away from the hubbub of city life, Morni Hills is a little hill station in the Panchkula district of Haryana.


Enriched with evergreen trees like pines, rhododendron, and rosewood, you will find peace in these hills saturated with magic and beauty. If you belong to busy places like Delhi, Chandigarh, or Haryana, these sleepy hills will fill you with their serenity. With its lush forests, gleaming fresh lakes, cool temperature, and waterfalls, Morni Hills are a perfect escape from the chaos of everyday life.


The Shivalik mountains of the Himalayas surround this hill station and as you might have already guessed, its beauty lies in its tranquility. There is something so serene and relaxing about the Morni Hills that makes it your ideal getaway destination. Since it’s the only hill station in Haryana, most people move on to seek refuge in other places that are famous for their soothing and escapist nature. So kindle your wanderlust and explore the unexplored!


Places to visit in Morni Hills


1. Tikkar Taal


Seven kilometers from the sleepy hills of Morni, Tikkar Taal has two artificial lakes. The hill separates them into Chhota Tal and Bada Tal. Tikkar Taal is located in the middle of the hill and offers great views of the hill. There aren't many places to stay in Tikkar Taal because of its unpopularity, but it doesn't bother nature lovers.


You will find a lot of places to stay here and they are very affordable! Tikkar Taal is perfect for budget travelers and as it’s away from industrialization, you will find peace in its resplendent atmosphere.


2. Gurudwara Nada Sahib


Located 17 km away, Gurdwara Nada Sahib is of great importance to the Sikhs. Legend has it that Guru Govind Singh rested here when he was paying homage to Anandpur Sahib. It is a sacred place and highly regarded amongst other Gurudwaras of India.


The Ghaggar-Hakra river flows alongside this Gurdwara and the swashing and rippling water gives you a peaceful retreat. Situated at the foot of the Shivalik Hills, Gurudwara Nada Sahib immerses you in a pristine atmosphere, while the tranquility of the Morni Hills makes you one with God. 


3. Adventure Park


The Haryana government has recognized the importance of tourism in the Morni Hills and has built an adventure park for the fun-loving daredevils. This adventure park is perfect for those who are adventurous but want to maintain safety simultaneously. There are also small swings for kids and a small coffee shop in case you’re thirsty after all the fun. Entry fees are cheap and you will not come out of this adventure park without having the best of your time! 


4. Morni Fort


Morni Hills is a haven for history buffs. A huge fort stretches over the hills of Morni and offers great views of the town of Morni. The fort is said to have been built in the 17th century. Although the fort has been rebuilt for tourists, it has not lost its former appearance. Morni Fort has plenty of greenery and the dark landscape of trees and flowers calms the atmosphere. The ornate temple next to the fort is dedicated to the god Shiva and contrasts its dark atmosphere.


5. Thakurdwara Temple


Morni Hills has a magnificent temple called Thakurdwara Temple, which makes it an abode for people of all religions. The sanctity of the temple envelops the sleepy Morni Hills and adds to its serenity. It calls for many disciples from all across the country. The temple is built with ancient stone carvings that date back to the Pandava era.




Things to do in Morni Hills


1. Sight-seeing: Morni Hills wait for you to unleash your sight-seeing spirit and mingle in its little glory. With attractions like Tikkar Taal and Morni Fort, you'll find the beauty of these sleepy hills come to life.
2. Boat rides: You can go boating with your family or friends in the lakes of Morni. There is a beautiful ambiance that will calm you.
3. Kids park and horror house: What is a vacation without some adventure, right? So pluck all your courage and visit the horror house at Morni! You'll get chills up your spine for sure. Only 45 kilometers from Chandigarh, you'll find this horror place near Tikkar Taal. There's also a kid's amusement park where your children can have a golden time. March-April or September-October is the best time to visit.
4. Roping: Morni is the untouched beauty of our country, teeming with activities and attractions. Apart from boat rides and sightseeing, you can do some rope climbing activities to fulfill your daring heart.
5. Lakeside cafe: Have some food at the lakeside cafe, while peering into the splendid lake.
6. Adventure park: Be ready to burst for an opportunity to unbridle your venturesome spirit in this adventure park situated in the Morni Hills. It is truly an immersing experience.
7. Museum: Visit the little learning center or the museum located 6 kilometers from Tikkar Taal. You'll be surprised to see how well maintained it is.




Travel tips for Morni Hills


1. Don’t forget to pack warm clothes for the early mornings and nights as they can be very cold.
2. There aren't many eating options, so bring food for a little picnic before heading to the adventure park.
3. You have to trek for at least 1200 meters and you don’t want cuts and scratches, right? So wear proper clothes to avoid any discomfort in your journey.
4. Do not travel in the dark as the Morni hills are steep.
5. Make sure you’re following the map properly because Morni Hills isn’t filled with many people so, if you need help, the map is your only go. 
6. The gloomy weather of the hills makes it very foggy so remember not to drive in the stark winter as it may obstruct your vision.


How to reach


Morni hills are only a five-hour drive away. Being easily reachable, it will become your favorite holiday destination. If you want to drive on your own or rent a taxi, say hello to maps and NH44! But if you want to get a better experience, you can travel by bus from Delhi to Chandigarh. Switch buses at Zirakpur to get to Morni Hills. 


For an unforgettable experience, you can bike to the Morni Hills, satisfying your passion for a bike rush. Don't forget to pack your safety equipment and follow all the traffic rules!


You can take the NH3 Zirakpur through to the Kalka-Shimla Highway. Turn right to Nadha Sahib Gurudwara after traveling for three kilometers and then turn left from Gugga Jahar Veer Jee. Cross the Holy Child School and voila, you’re at Morni Hills! 


Where to stay


1. Little Morni Family Resort


Little Morni Family Resort is very popular with travelers wanting to visit the Morni Hills. The resort is located in Tikkari. It is one of the most recommended resorts in Morni. 


Little Morni Family Resort is popular for a reason. With easy check-in and check-out facilities, flexible instructions, and a friendly atmosphere, this resort brings high satisfaction to the customers. Like most hotels, 12:00 PM is the check-in/ check-out time. 


2. Bushman


Bushman is the top hotel recommendation for tourists coming to Morni. They have easy check-in and check-out facilities, flexible instructions, and friendly staff bringing forth great satisfaction to the customers. Bushman has 2:00 PM as the check-in time and 12:00 PM as the check-out time. This hotel is great for couples and even single couples can feel safe here. 


3. Morni Heights


Amongst all other hotels here, Morni Heights is known for its high affordability. They have 1:30 PM as the check-in time and 11:30 AM as the check-out time. It is a couple-friendly hotel and even unmarried couples will find it comfortable here.


4. Greenland Guest House


Another very budget-friendly hotel in the Morni Hills is the Greenland Guest House. They have easy check-in and check-out facilities, flexible instructions, and friendly staff bringing forth great satisfaction to the customers. Greenland Guest House has 12:00 PM as the check-in time and 12:00 PM as the check-out time.


5. DM Farms Morni Hills


In addition to other reasonable hotels for tourists, DM Farms Morni Hills is a perfect homestay. 


They have easy check-in and check-out facilities, flexible instructions, and friendly staff preserving great customer satisfaction. DM Farms Morni Hills has 12:00 PM as the check-in time and 12:00 PM as the check-out time.


Final Thoughts


Slip away from the hustle and bustle of the city and savor the peace of the hills. Disappear from the humming monotony and head to the Morni Hills this weekend! The little sleepy hills are the bliss of heaven that will enliven your senses and inspire your vigor. You will find your hyperactive mind absorbed in the quietude of the hills.


Now that you’ve read through this guide, plan your perfect vacation with your family or friends and explore this little paradise on earth. Find yourself on top of the world in the Morni Hills and come back with a new enthusiasm for life!