L: Heya
K: Hey, what’s up?
L: Just chilling. What about you?
K: How can you chill? We have finals coming up.
L: That’s because I’m done with all our syllabus.
K: Already? How? When?
L: Hahaha, don’t be so surprised bro.
K: I feel so low right now, you have no idea.
L: Hey, hey, don’t worry. I’ll help you study.
K: You will? Omg, thank you so much.
L: No worries. What do you wanna start with?
K: History, please.
L: Alrighty, we’ll start with the first chapter then.
K: Okay. The first chapter is about the sources of history.
L: Right.
K: Let’s go.
L: Okie. So, in this chapter, we’ll study about the sources required to study history, the different types of sources of history, the importance of archaeological sources and Halmidi inscriptions and the oral sources that support the study of history.
K: Got it. Sounds very interesting.
L: It sure is, once you get the hang of it, of course.
K: Yupp.
L: So tell me, what do you mean by sources?
K: Umm, I know a very basic definition.
L: That will do.
K: Sources are the places from where something originates.
L: Right, so, to put it in a proper way, we can say that sources are the basic materials necessary for the construction of history.
K: Yesss.
L: Sources are very important to recognize our past and deconstruct it in modern terms.
K: They are like the building blocks of history, like our skeleton.
L: Yupp. Now, there are different kinds of sources which means that we do not have a universal history.
K: Yes, every country, every place in the world has a different history.
L: We all have different stories.
K: Right.
L: Sources can be classified into two groups: Literary sources and archaeological sources.
K: I see.
L: Literary sources are of two types: Native and foreign literature.
K: What about archaeological sources?
L: They are of three kinds: Inscriptions, coins and monuments.
K: Got it.
L: Literature produced by the natives of a certain place is known as native literature.
K: Like, the literature produced by Indians is part of native literature.
L: Absolutely. The sources comprising such literature are known as native literary sources.
K: Okay.
L: Vishakadatta’s ‘Mudrarakshasa’, Kalhana’s ‘Rajatarangini’, Ashwagosha’s ‘Buddha Charita’, Kautilya’s ‘Arthashastra’, the ‘Tripitikas’ of Buddhist literature, Srivijaya’s ‘Kavirajamarga’ are some of the literary productions worth mentioning.
K: Noted.
L: The writings of foreign visitors, explorers and scholars comprise of foreign literature and such writings are called foreign literary sources.
K: Right.
L: Megasthenes' Indica, HuienTsang’s ‘Si-yu-ki’, Fa-hien’s ‘Gho-kho-ki’, Ceylon’s ‘Deepavamsha’ and ‘Mahavamsa’, the writings of Furneo Nuniz and the writings of Barbosa and Nicolo Conti who visited the Vijayanagar Empire are some examples of this kind of source.
K: I’ll make a note of these.
L: Sure. Now, tell me, what are archaeological sources?
K: Archaeological sources are the inscriptions, coins, monuments, pottery, and other artifacts that have been obtained during archaeological excavations. 
L: Correct.
K: Thanks.
L: Inscriptions denote the time period from which it is excavated.
K: Yeah, they are like the markers of their time period.
L: They provide us information about religion, culture, economy, administration and other aspects of that period.
K: Right.
L: The earliest inscription found in India is the one written by the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka.
K: Cool, how did he engrave them?
L: He got the inscription engraved on rocks and stone pillars.
K: Ah, that is so cool.
L: Do you know what language they were in?
K: Nope, you tell me.
L: Inscriptions were mostly written in Bramhi script of Prakrit language. Some inscriptions have also been found in Greek, Armic and Kharosthi script.
K: Noice.
L: Ashoka’s inscriptions have been found in Maski and Bramhagiri in Karnataka.
K: Wow. This makes me wanna see them.
L: Ah, me too. The first inscription available in the Kannada language is the Halmidi inscription. This was written during the reign of King Kakutsavarma of the Kadamba dynasty.
K: I see.
L: Do you know what Numismatics is?
K: Nope.
L: Numismatics is the study of the evolution, nature and development of coins. 
K: Wow.
L: Coins are valuable sources of information that tell us a lot about the religion, culture, administration, social and economic aspects of their respective time periods.
K: I saw a wide collection of coins at the museum last time
L: That’s great. Other than coins, various monuments such as stupas, basadis, temples, palaces and forts give us information about the time periods they belong to.
K: Of course.
L: They help us understand civilization, technology and society so that we can situate them in today’s modern context.
K: Right.
L: Ashoka pillars, Ajanta and Ellora caves, the Elephanta caves, Badami, Aihole and Pattadakallu of Karnataka are some examples.
K: They all enable us to understand the social, cultural, political and religious life of that period.
L: Yup. Other than these physical sources, there are also oral sources.
K: Like?
L: From the beginning of time, these oral sources have been prevalent. People would tell stories by word of mouth and it would spread to others very effectively.
K: I see. 
L: Indian history begins with oral sources. These existed way before history was documented in written form.
K: Wow.
L: That finishes the chapter.
K: This was such a short chapter. I wanted more.
L: You’ll get more in the next chapters. Just wait and watch. You’ll beg me to stop once we begin them haha.
K: Not funny.
L: Okay, okay.
K: See you next time.
L: Okie.