How do I choose a color for my tattoo? A comprehensive guide.


Tattoos are artwork. An aesthetic on a more beautiful artwork like your body, an aesthetic to be proud of- a part of you committed to the excuse of survival as it leaves a permanent mark on your skin. Be comfortable, be safe as tattoos come a long way after good foundations are laid. While a majority of people can wear a tattoo on a fickle mind, other people and tattoo artists suggest that it’s a decision that is to be taken whole-heartedly and carefully. Besides the graveness of the consideration, one of the points that we need to bear in mind is the design, especially the color. A large number of tattoo artists and connoisseurs are adopting the inked pigment in their skins as it adds a quirky touch to their bodies. In order to find the perfect color for your tattoo, understanding the reaction of pigments to the skin is important. The pigment can have a huge impact on your tattoo because not every color will be profound on every overtone. Various pigments respond differently depending upon your undertone, so to get an awesome tattoo, you need to know what colors complement your natural undertone. This will help you choose and cherish a color for your tattoo which you would want to keep forever on your skin.


So, how do I choose a color for my tattoo?


To ensure your tattoo looks amazing – and that it persists for years – you need to choose the right ink. This is important because as mentioned above, every color ink we have looks different and reacts differently to different skin tones. 


While selecting your ink shades, you need to look at the two components in your skin: The overtone and the undertone.


Here’s a simple rule to understand it simply: Choose shades which are either a bit lighter than your skin or a bit darker than it.


Moreover, bear in mind that some colors unfold better on specific pigments better than others.


1. On light/fair Skin: White, or other light colors like sky blue, usually suits people with fair skin.  
2. Medium tinted skin: Red, green, orange and blue work well on tanned or olive-colored skin.  
3. Dark skin: For this, crimson, black, and dark blue look brilliant on dark skin tones. Any dark shade from the color spectrum actually.


But what is an undertone?


Undertone, quite literally is the first color you see while looking at your skin, which usually includes porcelain, olive, caramel, brown or black. Our skin color is determined by the amount of haemoglobin, melanin and carotene in our skin. Undertones are signified by the amount of melanin in your skin while haemoglobin and carotene levels determines the variation of the undertone. Thus, the amount of melanin you contain naturally establishes the intensity of your undertone, which settles in the middle layer of the dermis of your skin.There are three undertones to consider: warm, cool and neutral. People with yellow, peachy or golden complexions instilled with green-colored veins can have warm undertones. While those with blueish, pink or smoky complexion running through blue colored veins wear a cool undertone. Furthermore, a neutral undertone is a win-win game as they have a plain complexion and no well-defined vein color. Your undertone matters while choosing the right color for your tattoo so it’s best to look skin deep. For example: lipstick shades of the same color look different on people with different complexions. 


The undertone impacting on the tattoo colors


Typically sitting in the dermis, the tattoo is covered by a layer of melanin. The undertone which fits above the tattoo ink serves as a filter for the tattoo color. Owing to the kind of undertone one may have, the color might show stunning, bright hues like vibrant blue or glamorous red will pop  or the same shade can end up looking pale, making the person look ill.
Thus having some knowledge of tattoos and how they entail, how to care for them and what shades you must choose, the guide below will ensure on the right colors accepted by your undertone:


For warm undertones:


If you want a twist of color to your sun-kissed, shining skin, you are totally cut out for darker colors. Dark blue, red, purple, red and black will pop on your warm undertone. So, to get an epic tattoo that you want to last for years, it’s best to be inclined upon warmer colors as having heavy concentrations of melanin can expound the power over less loud colors.


For cool undertones:


People with fair skin undertones can pull off genuinely all colors with the exception of yellow. It will not complement completely, looking more like a scratch and you don’t want it to look like an unwanted worn-off scar, do you? 
Therefore, if you choose among the heavier colors on the spectrum like red, orange, purple, black or even white (though not heavy, still you would sport it excellently!) for your tattoo color, they will look greatly spirited against your pale skin.